

L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
LAWS OF GUYANA 
 
 
CONSTITUTION OF THE CO-OPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF 
 
CHAPTER 1:01 
 
 
Act 
2 of 1980 
Amended by 
 
17 of 1984 2 of 2000         O. 38/1987 
1 of 1988 11 of 2000 
23 of 1990 14 of 2000 
1 of 1991 17 of 2000 
12 of 1991 3-8 of 2001 
35 of 1991 5 of 2003 
35 of 1991 10 of 2003 
36 of 1991 16 of 2004 
11 of 1992 24 of 2006 
21 of 1993 22 of 2007 
15 of 1995 5 of 2009 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Current Authorised Pages 
 
Pages 
(inclusive) 
 Authorised 
by L.R.O. 
1 – 376 ...     1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUYANA ACT 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
2 
Cap. 1:01 
Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
Index 
 
of 
 
Subsidiary Legislation 
 
 
Page 
  
Constitution of the Orders of Guyana 
267 
(Proclamation  2/1976) 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Rules dated 15/1/1999)  
 
  
343 
290 
 
 
(Rule 2/ 2010)  
Judicial Service Commission Rules 
 
(Rule 1/1981) 
288 
Constitution of the Orders of Guyana 
Replacement of Medals, Miniatures and Ribbons Rules 
Public Service Commission Rules                                                                                  

LAWS OF GUYANA 
                               Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana  
Cap. 1:01 
3 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
CHAPTER 1:01 
 
CONSTITUTION  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
 
SECTION 
1. Short title. 
2. Interpretation. 
3. Constitutional  Instruments (including  the  existing  Constitution) 
 repealed.  
4. Appointed day. 
5. Exercise of powers of Parliament before appointed day. 
6. Exercise of power of President before appointed day. 
7. Existing laws. 
8. Parliament. 
9. Standing Orders. 
10. President. 
11. Prime Minister. 
12. Ministers, Attorney General, Parliamentary Secretaries, etc., 
13. Cabinet. 
14. Supreme Court of Judicature. 
15. Existing officers. 
16. Oaths. 
17. Commissions. 
18. Continuation of proceedings. 
19. Local democratic organs. 
20. Amendment of  certain  provisions  of  Amerindian  Lands 
  Commission Act. 
21.  Electoral districts and list of electors. 
22.  Amendment of this Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
OF THE CO-OPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA ACT 
SCHEDULE – The Constitution  
 of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana

LAWS OF GUYANA 
4 
Cap. 1:01 
Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
CONSTITUTION OF THE CO-OPERATIVE REPUBLIC  
 OF GUYANA ACT 
CHAPTER 1:01 
Commission,  the Police  Service  Commission,    the 
‚service    commission‛  means    the  Public    Service 
 
this Act; 
‚the existing Parliament‛ means the Parliament which enacted 
 
that day and coming into force on or after that day; 
and includes any Act or other written law made before 
laws of Guyana immediately before  the appointed day 
‚existing laws‛ means all laws which  had effect  as part of the 
 
immediately before the appointed day; 
‚the existing Constitution‛ means the Constitution in force 
 
constituted under the existing Constitution; 
‚the  existing  Assembly‛  means  the  National  Assembly 
 
           Schedule; 
‚the Constitution‛ means the Constitution set out in the 
 
th
‚appointed day‛ means the 6  day of October, 1980; 
 
2. (1) In this Act –  
 
operative Republic of Guyana Act. 
1.  This Act may be cited as the Constitution of the Co-
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interpretation. 
 
 
 
  
Short title.
TH
[20 FEBRUARY, 1980 ] 
 
thereto or connected therewith. 
Constitution, and to provide for matters incidental 
Independence    Order    1966,    and    the    existing 
Independence Act 1966, the Guyana  
Republic of    Guyana,    to repeal    the    Guyana 
An Act to enact a new Constitution of the Co-operative 
 
2 of 1980 
 
 
 
 
 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
                               Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana  
Cap. 1:01 
5 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Constitution-
al 
Instruments 
(including the 
existing  
Constitution) 
repealed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointed day. 
[Procl. 2/1980] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exercise  of 
powers of 
Parliament 
before 
appointed  
day. 
 
 
Exercise of 
power of 
President 
before 
appointed 
Judicial Service Commission or  the  Teaching Service 
Commission   in   existence   immediately before   the 
appointed day; 
 
and, save where the context otherwise requires, expressions 
used  in  sections  1  to  22(inclusive)  have  the  same    meaning 
as  in  the Constitution  and  the provisions  of  article 232 
thereof    shall  apply for  the  purpose of  interpreting those 
sections  as  they apply  for  the  purpose of  interpreting  the 
Constitution. 
  
(2)    References  in  article  133  of  the  Constitution  to 
any question as  to  the interpretation  of  the Constitution 
shall be construed as including references to any question as 
to the interpretation of any provision of this Act. 
 
3. Subject   to   the provisions of   this Act,   on   the 
appointed day all the provisions of the Guyana 
Independence  Act 1966,  the Guyana  Independence  Order 
1966 (in so far  as they form part of the  law of Guyana)  and 
the  existing Constitution  are  repealed  and  thereupon  the 
Constitution shall have effect as the supreme law of Guyana 
in place of the existing Constitution.  
 
4. The Constitution shall come into operation on the 
6
th
 day of October, 1980. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. At any  time  after  the enactment  of this  Act,  the 
existing Parliament may for  the  purpose of  enabling the 
Constitution  to  function  on  and    after    the  appointed  day 
exercise any  of  the powers conferred  on  the  Parliament 
established by the Constitution. 
 
6.  The power conferred  by  section  7(2)  to  make 
orders may be exercised by the President under the existing 
Constitution  at  any  time  after  the  enactment  of  this  Act to 
such  extent  as  may, in his  or  her opinion,  be  necessary or 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
6 
Cap. 1:01 
Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
day.  
 
 
 
Existing laws. 
[23 of 1990] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
expedient to enable the Constitution to function on and after 
the appointed day. 
 
7.(1) Subject to   the provisions of   this Act,   the 
existing laws   shall   continue in   force   on   and   after   the 
appointed day as if they had been made in pursuance of the 
Constitution but shall be construed with such modifications, 
adaptations, qualifications and exceptions as may be 
necessary to bring them into conformity with this Act.  
 
  (2) The President may  by  order  made  at  any  time 
within the period of three years next after the 
commencement of the Constitution make such 
modifications  to  any  existing  law as may  appear  to him  or 
her to  be  necessary or  expedient for  bringing  that  law into 
conformity with  the  provisions  of  this  Act or  otherwise for 
giving effect or enabling effect to   be given to   those 
provisions. 
 
 (3) Anything done under any existing law before its 
modification  by  or  under  this  section  which would,  but for 
this subsection, cease by virtue of that modification to have 
effect, shall continue to have effect as if done under that law 
as so modified. 
 
 (4) Where  any  matter that  falls to be  prescribed  or 
otherwise provided for under the Constitution by 
Parliament or by any other authority or person is prescribed 
or provided for by or under any existing law (including any 
amendment  to  any  such  law made  under  this  section)  or  is 
otherwise prescribed    or provided  for  immediately  before 
the appointed day by or under the laws repealed by section 
3, that prescription or provision shall, on and after that day, 
have effect (with such modifications, adaptations, 
qualifications and exceptions as may be necessary to bring it 
into conformity with this Act) as if it had been made under 
the  Constitution  by  Parliament or,  as  the  case may  require, 
by the other authority or person. 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
                               Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana  
Cap. 1:01 
7 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (5)    All    enactments    passed    or made by any 
Parliament or  person or  authority under or  by  virtue  of the 
Guyana    Independence    Order    1966    and    the existing 
Constitution and not before the appointed day declared by a 
competent court to  be  void  by  reason  of  any  inconsistency 
with any provision of the existing Constitution and that are 
not repealed, lapsed or spent or that had not otherwise had 
their  effect,  shall be  deemed to have  been  validly passed or 
made and to have had full force and effect as part of the law 
of  Guyana  immediately before  the  appointed  day even  if 
any  such  enactments  were  inconsistent with  any  provision 
of the existing Constitution. 
 
(6)Without prejudice    to    the generality of    the 
foregoing   provisions  of  this  section,  if  a  proclamation  of 
emergency is in   force   under   article 16   of   the existing 
Constitution  immediately   before  the appointed  day by 
virtue   of   a      resolution   of   the existing Assembly, the 
proclamation shall  on and after that day have  effect as if it 
had  been  made  under  article  150  of  the  Constitution  and 
(without prejudice  to  its  continuance  in  force  for  further 
periods  by virtue  of  the  provisions  of  paragraph    (3)(c)  of 
the said article 150) as if its continuance in force to the date 
referred  to  in  that  resolution  had   been   approved   by a 
resolution   passed   by the   National   Assembly under   the 
provisions of paragraph (3)(c) of the said article 150;  and if 
any person is on the appointed day detained or restricted  in 
the  manner referred to in article 151 of the  Constitution the 
provisions  of  that  article  requiring his  or  her case to  be 
reviewed  by  a  tribunal  established  for  the  purpose of  that 
article not later than three  months from the commencement 
of   the detention   or restriction   shall,   in   relation   to   that 
person,    have  effect  as  if  the  detention    or  restriction    had 
commenced on the appointed day. 
 
(7)  The provisions  of  this  section  shall  be  without 
prejudice  to  any powers conferred  by any law upon  any 
person   or authority to   make provision   for any matter, 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
8 
Cap. 1:01 
Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
including the making of modifications to any existing law. 
 
(8)  In  this  section  ‚modification‛  includes 
amendment, adaptation or  other  alteration  authorised  by 
subsection (1). 
 
(9) [Repealed by Act No. 23 of 1990] 
 
8.(1) Notwithstanding any  difference  between  the 
composition   of   the existing Assembly and   that   of   the 
National  Assembly established  by the Constitution,  with 
effect from   the appointed   day and   until   the National 
Assembly  sits  for  the  first time  after  the  first election  held 
pursuant to the provisions of article 60(2) of the Constitution, 
but  subject  to  subsection  (5),  the  existing  Assembly  shall  be 
deemed  to  be the National  Assembly established  by the 
Constitution  (referred  to  in  this  section  in  respect  of  that 
period as ‚the transitional National Assembly‛). 
 
(2)        Without prejudice    to    the generality of 
subsection   (1),   the persons who   immediately before   the 
appointed day were members of the existing Assembly shall 
with  effect  from  that  day  be  members  of  the  transitional 
National Assembly, and all questions concerning 
membership and  functioning of  the transitional  National 
Assembly shall be  regulated as nearly as may  be  practicable 
by the existing law applicable in the like case to the existing 
Assembly. 
 
(3) All matters pending before the existing 
Assembly immediately before  the appointed  day  may be 
continued   and   completed   by the transitional   National 
Assembly. 
 
(4) Unless and   until   the transitional   National 
Assembly  otherwise resolves,  any  person  who  is  a  member 
of that Assembly by virtue of subsection  (2) shall be deemed 
to have  made  and subscribed before the Assembly the oath 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
                               Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana  
Cap. 1:01 
9 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Standing 
Orders. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
President.  
 
 
 
 
 
referred to in article 167 of the Constitution. 
 
(5)   Unless sooner dissolved   by the President 
pursuant to the provisions of article 70(2) of the Constitution, 
the Parliament constituted    by the President and    the 
transitional National Assembly shall stand dissolved on 26th 
October, 1980. 
 
(6) The first election  of  members  of  the  National 
Assembly  pursuant  to  the  provisions  of  paragraphs  (3)  and 
(4) of article 60 of the Constitution shall be held on such day 
as  the  President may  by  proclamation  appoint,  being  a  day 
which he  or  she considers  to  be  as  early  as  practicable  after 
the  holding  of  the  first election  of  members  of  the  Regional 
Democratic  Council  or  of  the  National  Congress  of  Local 
Democratic Organs, as the case may be. 
 
(7)    All  moneys granted,  voted  or  appropriated  by 
the  existing  Assembly  in  respect  of  the  services  of  Guyana 
for  the  current  financial  year  shall  be  deemed  to  have  been 
granted,  voted  or  appropriated  by the  National  Assembly 
established  by  the  Constitution  and  in  accordance  with  the 
Constitution. 
 
9.  The   rules   and  orders  of   the  existing  Assembly  
as    in    force  immediately  before  the  appointed  day shall, 
until  it  is  otherwise provided    for    under  article    165  of    the  
Constitution,    be    the  rules of    procedure    of  the  National   
Assembly established  under  the  Constitution,  but  shall  be 
construed with such modifications, adaptations, 
qualifications  and  exceptions  as  may  be  necessary  to  bring 
them into conformity with the Constitution.  
 
10.   (1)   The person   who   immediately before   the 
appointed  day  holds  the  office  of  Prime  Minister  under  the 
existing Constitution shall, subject to the provisions of article 
97 of the Constitution (relating to the taking of an oath by the 
President),  assume  office  as  President of  the  Co-operative 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
10 
Cap. 1:01 
Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prime 
Minister. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministers, 
Attorney-
General, 
Parliamentary 
Secretaries etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Republic of Guyana that day as if he or she had been elected 
thereto  in  pursuance  of  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution 
and shall, unless he or she sooner dies or resigns or unless he 
or  she ceases to hold office by  virtue of articles 93 and 94 of 
the  Constitution,  continue in  office  until  the  person  elected 
President in the next following Presidential election held for 
the purposes of article 91 of the Constitution assumes office. 
 
(2)  On  the  assumption  of his  or  her office  pursuant 
to  subsection  (1)  the  first President of  Guyana  shall  cease to 
be  a  member  of  the  National  Assembly  and his  or  her seat 
shall  thereby  become  vacant  and  may  be  filled  as  nearly  as 
practicable in accordance with the provisions of article 70 of 
the existing Constitution. 
 
11. Until a Prime Minister is appointed under article 
101  of  the  Constitution,  the  person  who  immediately  before 
the  appointed  day holds  the  office  of  Minister  under  the 
existing  Constitution  which, however  styled,  ranks  next  in 
seniority after  the  office  of  Prime  Minister  and  who  is  an 
elected member of the  existing Assembly shall, on and after 
that day, hold the office of Prime Minister as if he or she had 
been appointed thereto under that article. 
 
12.  (1)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  sections  10  and 
11,  the  persons  who  immediately  before  the  appointed  day 
held   office   as Minister   (other   than   as Prime Minister), 
Attorney General, Parliamentary Secretary, Speaker, Deputy 
Speaker or Minority Leader shall, on and after that day, hold 
the corresponding office established by the Constitution as if 
they had  been  appointed or  elected thereto, as the case  may 
be, in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. 
 
(2) Any person holding the office of Prime  Minister 
or  of  Minister  by  virtue  of  the  provisions  of  section  11  or  of 
subsection  (1)  of  this  section  respectively  who,  immediately 
before the appointed day, was assigned responsibility under 
the existing Constitution for any business of the Government 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
                               Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana  
Cap. 1:01 
11 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cabinet.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Supreme 
Court of 
Judicature.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Existing 
Officers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of  Guyana,  including  the  administration  of  any  department 
of  Government,  shall,  on  and  after  that  day, be  deemed  to 
have  been  assigned  responsibility therefor  under  article  107 
of the Constitution. 
 
13.  Subject  to  paragraph (1)  of  article 106  of  the 
Constitution, every person who does not otherwise become a 
member  of  the  Cabinet  established  by the  Constitution  but 
who  immediately  before  the  appointed  day  is  a  member  of 
the Cabinet under  the  existing Constitution  shall  on  and 
after that day be a member of the Cabinet established by the 
Constitution  as  if he or  she had  been  appointed  thereto 
under that paragraph. 
 
14. (1) The Supreme Court of Judicature in existence 
immediately before the appointed day shall on and after that 
day  be  the  Supreme Court  of  Judicature  for  the  purposes of 
the Constitution as if it were established thereunder. 
 
(2) Any  decision  given  before   the appointed day 
by    any court forming   part of  the    Supreme   Court   of 
Judicature  in  existence  immediately before  that  day  shall,  
for    the    purpose   of  its  enforcement or  for  the  purpose   of 
any appeal therefrom, have effect on  and after that  day as if 
it were  a decision  of the corresponding court established by 
the Constitution. 
 
15.  (1)  Subject  to  the  provisions    of  this  Act,  every 
person  who immediately before  the appointed day holds or 
is  acting  in  a  public  office  shall,  on  and  after  that  day, hold 
or act in that office or the corresponding office established by 
the Constitution, as the case may be, as if he or she had been 
appointed  to  do  so in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the 
Constitution: 
 
Provided   that   any person   who,   under   the laws 
repealed by  section 3 or  any other existing law, would have 
been  required  to  vacate his  or  her office  at  the  expiration  of 

LAWS OF GUYANA 
12 
Cap. 1:01 
Constitution of the Co-operative Republic of Guyana 
 
L.R.O. 1/2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oaths. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commissions.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
any  period  shall  vacate his  or  her or office  at  the  expiration 
of that period. 
 
(2) Subsection  (1)  shall  apply  in  relation  to   the  
offices  of Chancellor, Chief Justice, Justice of Appeal, Puisne 
Judge,  O